♪♪♪
(Claire Standley) Hello, my name is Claire Standley, and I’m an Assistant Research Professor
from the Center for Global Health Science and Security at Georgetown University.
(Jim Banaski) And I am Jim Banaski, a Public Health Emergency Management Specialist
at the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(Claire Standley) This video provides a brief overview of emergency management
as a set of principles and associated tools that can be used to support
public health responses, such as management of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We will also introduce you to some of the resources available on this website
to help build or strengthen emergency management capabilities.
(Jim Banaski) First of all, what do we mean by the term “emergency management”?
The term “emergency management” describes the organization and management of resources
and responsibilities associated with all aspects of emergencies,
including before and after the response efforts.
These different stages are sometimes referred to as the emergency management cycle,
and include mitigation (sometimes also called prevention), preparedness,
response, and recovery. These stages can also overlap,
with mitigation activities coinciding with preparedness, for example,
or recovery efforts starting even while a response is underway.
(Jim Banaski) A core principle of emergency management is the use
of standardized management structure that allows for a common
understanding of roles, responsibilities, and processes.
One such management structure, which is internationally recognized as a best practice,
is called the incident management system, or IMS.
IMS, based on the principals of the Incident Command System and other
similar management structures, are designed to encompass a number of key attributes,
including a standardized and unified command structure, management by objectives,
modular organization, and an emphasis on incident action planning, among others.
These attributes enhance organization, communication, and coordination,
while maintaining effective accountability.
(Jim Banaski) Emergency operations centers are the control facilities
responsible for carrying out the functions of emergency management.
In the most basic sense, they serve as centralized sites for coordination
of resources, information, and communication during response efforts.
EOCs are made of three core elements: infrastructure, personnel, and processes.
The infrastructure of an EOC relates to its physical location, design, and equipment.
The personnel is the staff required to manage its operations.
The processes are the systems and procedures through which the EOC operates,
both in times of emergencies as well as during peacetime.
(Jim Banaski) EOCs are organized using a management structure
like IMS. Outside of emergencies,
many EOC staff serve in other functions.
During the mitigation and preparedness phases,
they may be required to complete refresher trainings,
contribute to the development or review of plans,
or participate in simulation exercises to practice
those plans and hone their readiness.
Once there is an alert of a possible emergency,
the EOC is “activated,” and the staff take up their response roles
within the EOC’s IMS framework.
The overall response is managed by the incident manager,
who oversees separate units in charge of planning, operations,
logistics, and finance and administration, as well as other
specialized roles such as safety, public relations,
and liaisons with other organizations or outside entities.
When the response concludes, the EOC can be deactivated again,
and staff resume their normal duties.
(Jim Banaski) EOCs, and the emergency management principles and structures
that support them, have been demonstrated to be powerful tools
for supporting emergency response across all sorts of disasters and crises.
Public health emergencies are no exception.
The core principles of planning and preparation, management of supplies and resources,
and ensuring clear lines of communication and accountability,
both internally and outward to the public,
are critical tools for supporting public health responses.
For example, in 2014, Nigeria’s public health EOC,
which had originally been established to help coordinate the polio eradication effort,
proved to be an extremely important tool in helping to manage contact tracing
and case management when the Ebola virus disease was introduced from Liberia.
In the end, despite global fears of Ebola spreading unchecked in Lagos,
the Nigerian Ministry of Health, coordinating its efforts through the EOC,
was able to respond incredibly quickly on transmission
and limit the total number of cases to only 20, with fewer than 10 deaths.
(Claire Standley) The current COVID-19 pandemic is an example
of a globally relevant public health response that can benefit
from the application of emergency management principles,
and the use of an emergency operations center to coordinate response efforts.
As a reminder, COVID-19 was first reported in December, 2019, by the Chinese government
as a cluster of unusual pneumonia cases in Hubei province,
centered around the city of Wuhan.
Within just a few weeks, the number of cases escalated extremely rapidly,
and on January 30, the World Health Organization declared the epidemic to be
a “public health emergency of international concern."
Despite China quickly implementing strict control measures,
including a full lockdown in the city of Wuhan,
the virus had already spread to other parts of the world,
in part due to individuals being able to transmit the virus prior to experiencing any symptoms.
Large numbers of cases were soon being reported from countries
like Iran, Italy, Spain, and France.
On March 11, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 to be a pandemic.
To date, as of May 12, there have been almost 4.2 million confirmed cases of COVID-19
and over 268,000 deaths across the world,
with about two-thirds of the total cases reported from just six countries:
the USA, Spain, Italy, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom.
(Claire Standley) The rapid spread and severity of the disease in some individuals,
in particular the elderly and those with underlying health conditions,
has prompted most countries to pursue strategies to try
to ensure their healthcare systems are not overwhelmed.
The fundamental approach for responding to the COVID-19 pandemic
remains the tried and tested tools of public health response: identify affected individuals,
monitor them (and isolate or quarantine as necessary),
and trace and monitor their contacts,
while preventing infections in healthcare settings.
However, the scale of the pandemic has required most countries to adopt
substantial additional measures to prevent community transmission,
including stay-at-home orders, closing public spaces and recreation areas,
reducing or closing public transportation, and suspending schools and universities.
Ensuring compliance with these measures has required clear and consistent risk communication,
provided by trusted authorities. The intent of these public health measures
is to reduce the rate of new infections,
and limit the number of severely ill people requiring hospitalization, to ensure
the healthcare system has sufficient beds, ventilators, and other critical resources
– both for COVID-19 patients, as well as all others requiring urgent medical care.
Once the number of new cases drops, governments and local authorities can begin to decide
whether certain economic or social activities can resume
– though such relaxing of measures should be done carefully, deliberately, and
only in parallel with sufficient testing capacity to assess any new surges in case numbers.
(Claire Standley) These efforts require close operational coordination
across multiple sectors – public health epidemiologists who are analyzing case data;
laboratorians conducting diagnostic tests;
logisticians, determining how to ensure frontline
health care workers have sufficient personal protective equipment;
and public outreach experts, who are responsible for communicating
key policy decisions to the public and other affected stakeholders.
Operational response efforts also need to be coordinated
with broader policy decision-making processes,
managed by national and sub-national political leaders.
In all these ways, COVID-19 response efforts can benefit
from application of core Emergency Management principles,
including coordination through structures like emergency operations centers.
(Claire Standley) Georgetown University has collaborated
with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
to create this website containing training materials, checklists, and other resources
for development and strengthening of public health emergency management capacities,
with an emphasis on emergency operations centers.
These materials are organized into seven sections,
covering the basics of why emergency operations centers are important;
how they are structured and organized;
how they should be designed and equipped,
considering all different resource settings and requirements;
how they are activated, operationalized, and deactivated;
and finally, what efforts are needed to keep
emergency operations centers and staff prepared outside of emergencies.
Within each section, you will find an introductory presentation
covering the main concepts, together with additional references,
guidance documents, and other resources to support implementation.
(Claire Standley) We also encourage you to reach out to us for more information,
or to request specific technical assistance with developing or operationalizing your EOC,
whether you are working at the national, regional, or local level.
Please use the “Contact Us” link to reach out with requests or for more information.
Thank you, and we hope you find these resources useful
as you respond to the COVID-19 pandemic,
as well as any future threats to public health in your area.
♪♪♪